README.md, before:

The Lushootseed (Southern Puget Sound Salish) morphology and tools
==========================================

[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-raw/giellalt/lang-lut)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/issues)
[![Build Status](https://divvun-tc.thetc.se/api/github/v1/repository/giellalt/lang-lut/main/badge.svg)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/giellalt/lang-lut)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![Desktop speller download](https://img.shields.io/badge/download%40latest-desktop--bhfst-brightgreen)](https://pahkat.uit.no/main/download/speller-lut?platform=desktop&channel=nightly)
[![Mobile speller download](https://img.shields.io/badge/download%40latest-mobile--bhfst-brightgreen)](https://pahkat.uit.no/main/download/speller-lut?platform=mbile&channel=nightly)

This repository contains finite state source files for the Lushootseed language,
for building morphological analysers, proofing tools
and dictionaries. The data and implementation are licenced under GNU GPL
licence, also detailed in the
[LICENSE](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/blob/main/LICENSE). The
authors named in the AUTHORS file are available to grant other licencing
choices.

Install proofing tools and [keyboards](https://github.com/giellalt/keyboard-lut)
for the Lushootseed language by using the [Divvun Installer](http://divvun.no)
(some languages are only available via the nightly channel).

Documentation
-------------

Documentation can be found at:

-   <https://giellalt.uit.no/lang/lut/SouthernPugetSoundSalishDocumentation.html>
-   <https://giellalt.uit.no/index.html>

Core dependencies
-----------------

In order to compile and use Lushootseed language morphology and
dictionaries, you need:

- an FST compiler: [HFST](https://github.com/hfst/hfst), [Foma](https://github.com/mhulden/foma) or [Xerox Xfst](https://web.stanford.edu/~laurik/fsmbook/home.html)
- [VislCG3](https://visl.sdu.dk/svn/visl/tools/vislcg3/trunk) Constraint Grammar tools

To install VislCG3 and HFST, just copy/paste this into your Terminal on **Mac OS X**:

```
curl https://apertium.projectjj.com/osx/install-nightly.sh | sudo bash
```

or terminal on **Ubuntu, Debian or Windows Subsystem for Linux**:

```
wget https://apertium.projectjj.com/apt/install-nightly.sh -O - | sudo bash
sudo apt-get install cg3 hfst
```

or terminal on **RedHat, Fedora, CentOS or Windows Subsystem for Linux**:

```
wget https://apertium.projectjj.com/rpm/install-nightly.sh -O - | sudo bash
sudo dnf install cg3 hfst
```

Alternatively, the Apertium wiki has good instructions on how to [install the dependencies for Mac
OS X](https://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Apertium_on_Mac_OS_X) and how to [install
the dependencies on
linux](https://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Installation_of_grammar_libraries)

Further details and dependencies are described on the GiellaLT [Getting Started](https://giellalt.uit.no/infra/GettingStarted.html) pages.

Downloading
-----------

Using Git:
```
git clone https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut
```

Using Subversion:
```
svn checkout https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut.git/trunk lang-lut
```

Building and installation
-------------------------

[INSTALL](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/blob/main/INSTALL)
describes the GNU build system in detail, but for most users it is the usual:

```sh
./autogen.sh # This will automatically clone or check out other GiellaLT dependencies
./configure
make
(as root) make install
```

Commit message:

[Template merge] Add link to divvunspell

README.md, after:

The Lushootseed (Southern Puget Sound Salish) morphology and tools
==========================================

[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues-raw/giellalt/lang-lut)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/issues)
[![Build Status](https://divvun-tc.thetc.se/api/github/v1/repository/giellalt/lang-lut/main/badge.svg)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/github/license/giellalt/lang-lut)](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/blob/main/LICENSE)
[![Desktop speller download](https://img.shields.io/badge/download%40latest-desktop--bhfst-brightgreen)](https://pahkat.uit.no/main/download/speller-lut?platform=desktop&channel=nightly)
[![Mobile speller download](https://img.shields.io/badge/download%40latest-mobile--bhfst-brightgreen)](https://pahkat.uit.no/main/download/speller-lut?platform=mbile&channel=nightly)

This repository contains finite state source files for the Lushootseed language,
for building morphological analysers, proofing tools
and dictionaries. The data and implementation are licenced under GNU GPL
licence, also detailed in the
[LICENSE](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/blob/main/LICENSE). The
authors named in the AUTHORS file are available to grant other licencing
choices.

Install proofing tools and [keyboards](https://github.com/giellalt/keyboard-lut)
for the Lushootseed language by using the [Divvun Installer](http://divvun.no)
(some languages are only available via the nightly channel).

Use and test spellers
---------------------

The spellers downloadable at the top of this page (the `*.bhfst` files) can be
used with [divvunspell](https://github.com/divvun/divvunspell).

Documentation
-------------

Documentation can be found at:

-   <https://giellalt.uit.no/lang/lut/SouthernPugetSoundSalishDocumentation.html>
-   <https://giellalt.uit.no/index.html>

Core dependencies
-----------------

In order to compile and use Lushootseed language morphology and
dictionaries, you need:

- an FST compiler: [HFST](https://github.com/hfst/hfst), [Foma](https://github.com/mhulden/foma) or [Xerox Xfst](https://web.stanford.edu/~laurik/fsmbook/home.html)
- [VislCG3](https://visl.sdu.dk/svn/visl/tools/vislcg3/trunk) Constraint Grammar tools

To install VislCG3 and HFST, just copy/paste this into your Terminal on **Mac OS X**:

```
curl https://apertium.projectjj.com/osx/install-nightly.sh | sudo bash
```

or terminal on **Ubuntu, Debian or Windows Subsystem for Linux**:

```
wget https://apertium.projectjj.com/apt/install-nightly.sh -O - | sudo bash
sudo apt-get install cg3 hfst
```

or terminal on **RedHat, Fedora, CentOS or Windows Subsystem for Linux**:

```
wget https://apertium.projectjj.com/rpm/install-nightly.sh -O - | sudo bash
sudo dnf install cg3 hfst
```

Alternatively, the Apertium wiki has good instructions on how to [install the dependencies for Mac
OS X](https://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Apertium_on_Mac_OS_X) and how to [install
the dependencies on
linux](https://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Installation_of_grammar_libraries)

Further details and dependencies are described on the GiellaLT [Getting Started](https://giellalt.uit.no/infra/GettingStarted.html) pages.

Downloading
-----------

Using Git:
```
git clone https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut
```

Using Subversion:
```
svn checkout https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut.git/trunk lang-lut
```

Building and installation
-------------------------

[INSTALL](https://github.com/giellalt/lang-lut/blob/main/INSTALL)
describes the GNU build system in detail, but for most users it is the usual:

```sh
./autogen.sh # This will automatically clone or check out other GiellaLT dependencies
./configure
make
(as root) make install
```
